Intro: Welcome to the Heart Basement
You are about to play a game in which you will think about practical ways to get the water out of your flooded basement, throughout the game, we will pause and make some changes to the terminology (to medical/pharmacological/physiological terms) and by analogy demonstrate how these principles that you are already familiar with apply to the treatment of heart failure. So, lets begin:
The idea of using the bucket to toss water out the window is the baseline situation. You may consider this to be the patient before any treatments. Think of the bucket as the kidney (without any treatment). While getting rid of water, the kidney is overwhelmed (and also in the body the kidney may retain water to some extent thinking it is helping the heart by providing more fluid to pump since the kidney is not seeing an adequate flow of blood when the heart fails. This lack of  blood flow is a demonstration of the failing heart, not a lack of fluid. Fluid builds up, the patient gets edema or swelling (gravity dependent) and may also experience shortness of breath (at night when lying down due to redistribution of fluid) and will experience weight gain.
In the next slide, we will focus on the heart.

Chapt 1: Get Pump (heart) from Hardware Store
“The Pump” you get from the Hardware Store (or in our medical analogy, the medical supply store, drug store, etc) is analogous to the Heart. Realize the heart is a pump. It is designed to pump blood/oxygen to meet the metabolic demands of the body. Now, let us consider the definition of Heart Failure - Heart Failure is the inability of the heart to provide (pump) enough blood to meet the needs of the body. The objective measure of how well the is working is the CARDIAC OUTPUT. The Cardiac Output is the Product of the Stroke Volume (how much blood the heart pumps with each beat) multiplied by the heart rate (beats/minute). So, when you get the pump at the hardware store, the longer handle allows you to move more water through the pump with each cycle (or “beat”) this increases the stroke volume as opposed to the shorter handle. The rate is determined by how fast you move the handle up and down.


Chapt 2: Try New Parts (Improve Cardiac Function)
So, the longer handle increases stroke volume and if you pump at an adequate rate (say 70 beats / min or pump cycles per min) with the longer handle you have improved the output as opposed using to the shorter handle. 
Now, you may have also purchased he larger diameter (larger circle) hose at the hardware store. This is physiologically like giving some medication (a vasodilator) which will decrease what is called "afterload". Afterload is the resistance the heart must pump against. So, decreasing the afterload (getting a larger diameter hose) decreases the work of the heart. If you pump water through a 1 inch diameter garden hose, it will be easier than trying to pump the same amount of water through a ¼ inch diameter drinking straw.So, to review, the longer handle improves the "stroke volume", which is the amount of blood the heart pumps with each beat, multiplied by the number of beats per minute (heart rate). Back to the heart, the average adult heart pumps about 5 liters of blood per minute. This is about 70 ml of blood with each beat times an average heart rate of 70 beats per minute (4900 ml or 4.9 liters/minute). For perspective, a normal 10 oz cup of coffee is about 300 ml.




Chapter 3: Recruit Muscle
As you were thinking about working the pump up and down, you thought this is a lot of work. It is a lot of work for the heart as well. So let us now think about “muscle”. The heart is a muscle (or a pump). The heart muscle can be weakened by a variety of problems including pump problems and electrical problems. Pump problems include things like angina, a lack of blood flow and oxygen which weakens the heart muscle. You would be increasingly tired if you could not take a break to get some food and a drink. Other pump problems in the real heart (and our pump) include things like leaky (regurgitant) or tight (stenotic) valves which can impact cardiac output or affect the unidirectional flow of blood. Electrical problems can include things like cardiac arrhythmias (like afib or others in the heart) or electrical problems with a pump. So, in the real heart, drugs like digoxin and other measures may be used to improve contractility (how effectively the heart pumps). These drugs or other maneuvers help to recruit muscle. In our game the recruitment of muscle was calling our big friend Tony and letting him work the pump.


Chapter 4: Order Pizza & Beer
The Pizza and Beer can be equated to the Digoxin (and other medications like diuretics - HCTZ) which improve the heart muscle’s ability to pump. So, if we consider our friend Tony to be the muscle, the pizza and beer is like the Digoxin and HCTZ which encourages him to stay around and help us. This is the recruitment of and improvement in cardiac muscle function in the medical world. Physiologically the heart follows the Starling curve and it helps to explain some of the treatments which are similar in many ways to the things you are doing to get the water out of the basement.

Chapter 5: Second Flood
So, the basement is full of water. We have talked about some of the things you can do to improve your ability to get the water out of the basement. And your logical thinking about pumping water out of the basement is being translated to similar things you can do to treat heart failure. So, now let’s look at out pump a bit more. You may have noticed some leaking around one of the valves in the pump and perhaps you are thinking about a larger diameter hose from the pump to the window. In the medical world, leaking (regurgitant) or narrowed (stenotic) heart valves can be a part of or be the primary cause of heart failure. In addition, if you noticed an improvement in your ability to pump the water out of the basement with the larger diameter hose, this is similar to reducing “afterload” which is the resistance the heart must pump against. It is shown in the picture on the last slide. Here are some of the drugs used to treat heart failure.

Chapter 6:  Order Electric Pump
Now, as we are fighting to get the water out of the basement, we have made a number of adjustments to our bilge pump to improve the efficiency. The “longer handle” is to increase Stroke Volume (Cardiac Output = Stroke Volume x Heart Rate). We have recruited more muscle (our Friend Tony) and we have corrected valve problems in our pump (fixed the leak), and used a larger diameter hose (reduced the afterload). These are all things your cardiologist would be doing to improve your heart function if you had heart failure. But it is not enough, so you go back to the hardware store and you now order up an electric pump. This will certainly help get the water out of the basement. Medically, in a similar fashion, your cardiologist might recommend to you to consider a device called an LVAD (Left Ventricular Assist Device) which is literally an electric pump to help your heart’s function.

Chapter 7:  Fix Electric Pump
The LVAD is an electric pump. Just like the natural heart, we need to have it functioning properly and efficiently. It is sometimes referred to as a bridge to transplantation. In our game, the transplantation would be a new house which you may have seen the “For Sale” sign on that house on the top of the hill in your trips to the Hardware Store. A Heart Transplant would be the final treatment for Heart Failure.

Chapter 8: Buy New House

Chapter 9: End of Game
